All right. Let's talk about
computer architecture.
Now what is computer
architecture?
You've probably heard about
architecture before when
people are talking about
the skyscrapers in hospitals,
and museums, and stuff like that.
Well, computer architecture
is actually pretty simple.
There's lots of
different kinds of buildings,
lots of different kinds
of computers,
and you wouldn't
architect a home,
the same way you would
architect a car wash,
and you wouldn't
architect the Museum the
same way you do a restaurant.
Well, there's different
types of computers,
you wouldn't architect them
exactly the same
either because each
one has its own specific set
of needs and purposes,
just like the buildings.
So there's certain things
you need to take into
consideration when thinking
about computer architecture.
It's the set of rules and
methods that describe
the functionality,
organization, and implementation
of the computer system.
Now this includes hardware,
software, and everything in
between, and all around it.
Let's talk about hardware.
When we talk about hardware,
we're talking about the stuff
you can physically see
and touch, stuff like CPUs,
memory, hard drives, network
cards, I/O adapters,
the graphical processing unit,
all that stuff.
The stuff that you can pick up,
take a look at, and shove
back into the computer.
Don't shove it back into
the computer, place it gently.
We're talking about software,
that's the stuff
that we can't see,
that stuff like programs
that are written
in code: operating systems,
built-in programs like
Notepad, applications.
You're right, libraries,
ones you download,
tools, utilities,
programs, all stuff.
You can think about
the operating system
as the primary program,
and everything else
just goes through it.
So there instances when
you're going to write
software that sits directly
on top of the hardware,
that doesn't use the
operating system.
Those do exist, but
most of the time,
the operating system is
there in the middle,
making sure not only
this stuff is easier to write,
but it's going to run
safer as well. All right.
Let's get into these computer
architecture components.
Earlier, I talked about how
architecture computer is a lot
like the architecture
of a building,
lots of different buildings,
lots of different computers.
Now a building typically
has a couple of things in common,
it got walls, it's got a roof,
it got floor, hallway,
it probably has
an electrical system,
probably plumbing,
windows, doors.
You can see there's a lot of
stuff to think about there.
In computer architecture, you've
got a series of components,
and the architecture
is all about how
they are designed to work
well with one another,
and fit together, so that
it performs as a bank,
or as a museum again.
We can see this in computer
architecture as well.
There's this split between
the hardware and
the software side.
So let's start with
software design.
Software design
includes the compiler,
firmware, operating
system, applications.
The hardware design includes
physical circuit, digital design,
data path control,
instruction set procedures,
and I/O systems.
Let's start by talking
about the software.
Now, you can generally split
software into
two distinct flavors,
there's application software
and the system software.
Application software
is what you generally
call an app, short
for application.
You start it, it runs,
it does its thing,
and when it's done you
don't need it anymore,
you just stop it,
and it goes away.
It generally interacts with you,
or maybe another user, or a file.
But it typically sits on top
of the operating system,
and it's going to use
the operating system
to get the data it needs,
to access memory, to talk to
the network, all that stuff.
Now system software
is the code that
runs as part of the
operating system generally.
Without the system software,
you wouldn't be able to run
any application software,
because generally, it's
the application software telling
the system software
what it wants.
Then there's firmware.
Firmware generally gets
written to read only memory,
and it comes from the factory
associated with
that piece of hardware,
and you're not
going to change it,
unless there's a problem
that needs to get fixed,
or there's a new
feature coming out.
You can upgrade
the firmware to get that.
The firmware provides
a common set of methods for
doing things that the operating
system is going to use.
Let's take a step back and
see what we have so far, right?
We've talked about
a lot of stuff.
We have the application software,
that's the app, all right?
That sits on top of
the operating system,
the system software.
But there's actually
a step before
that because you have to
build the application.
So you write the application
in software language
like Java, C++,
something like that.
Now I can write some code,
and you can probably
take a look at it,
and see what I'm trying to do.
The computer itself doesn't
understand this yet,
until we run it through
something called a compiler.
A compiler takes source code
which is the stuff that I write,
and then compiles it into
something machine can run.
That's called object code,
and it's a one-way direction.
You can't take
object code and then
break it apart into
its source code.
It's like baking a cake,
you can't take a cake,
and turn it back into
its ingredients,
it's the finished product there.
So that's how you make
an application or a cake.
Okay. So we've got our compiler,
we've got an application,
we've got the operating system.
Then before that, before it
actually hits the hardware,
we've got something called
the instruction set,
which is part of the instruction
set architecture,
another aspect of
computer architecture.
This is ultimately what bridges
the gap between the software
and the hardware.
The instruction set is
basically everything that
the computer's processor
is capable of doing.
It lists out every single
function it can do.
I can compare these
two numbers together,
tell you which ones greater.
If they're equal, add
these two numbers together,
store this data over here,
move this data over there.
It's nothing too fancy.
But these are the small
building blocks
that you can use to
make these higher-level
fancy applications from.
Now ultimately, everything
we're doing right
now is that we can get
something onto the processor,
so the processor can run
this application, right?
That's why we're
doing all this stuff.
You've probably seen
a processor too.
You're thinking about this,
it's a square chip thing
with a whole bunch of
metal pins on the bottom of it.
Well, those metal pins
aren't just for traction,
they're there because they
hook into the motherboard,
or the back plane
of the computer,
and we've just send
electrical impulses through it.
That's how we tell the chip,
the processor what
we want it to do.
Then we want to get
the answer of what
those two numbers
added together are,
we have to do a read,
so we have to know which pins
to read from, right?
There's a whole lot of
stuff to understand there,
and that's all documented
in the instruction set.
Now you can picture a calculator
is a type of computer,
a phone is a type of computer,
a supercomputer is
a type of computer.
Three different types
of computers,
three different architectures,
three different
instruction sets, right?
So we ultimately need
a compiler for each
one of those, right?
The blueprints for all that are
contained within
the instruction set,
and part of the instruction
set architecture.
Even in very simple
couple of lines of
code program like add
these things together,
it has to take quite a journey
to get from something that I can
describe to something that can be
represented
electronically on a CPU.
Then there's a whole other area
of physical design,
that describes building
the logic gates
and physical chips,
that falls under digital design,
circuit implementation, and
physical implementation.
Believe me, that goes off
pretty far in its own direction.
We've covered a lot here:
from stuff you can see,
to stuff your run,
to stuff you write,
to stuff that you
just have to trust
that it's there because there's
no way a computer
would work without it.
There's definitely
a near infinite number
of ways you could
architect a computer.
Hopefully, the computer you're
using right now was built for
a specific purpose and it
does it really, really well.
In the next lesson, we're going
to talk about
a computer that's been
architected specifically to
run business transactions,
and that's the IBM Z.